# Deep Learning Powered Identification of Differentiated Early Mesoderm Cells from Pluripotent Stem Cells

This repository contains the codes of the paper: https://doi.org/10.3390/cells13060534

# Abstract
Pluripotent stem cells can be differentiated into all three germ-layers including ecto-, endo-, and mesoderm in vitro. However, the early identification and rapid characterization of each germ-layer in response to chemical and physical induction of differentiation is limited. This is a long-standing issue for rapid and high-throughput screening to determine lineage specification efficiency. Here, we present deep learning (DL) methodologies for predicting and classifying early mesoderm cells differentiated from embryoid bodies (EBs) based on cellular and nuclear morphologies. Using a transgenic murine embryonic stem cell (mESC) line, namely OGTR1, we validated the upregulation of mesodermal genes (Brachyury (T): DsRed) in cells derived from EBs for the deep learning model training. Cells were classified into mesodermal and non-mesodermal (representing endo- and ectoderm) classes using a convolutional neural network (CNN) model called InceptionV3 which achieved a very high classification accuracy of 97% for phase images and 90% for nuclei images. In addition, we also performed image segmentation using an Attention U-Net CNN and obtained a mean intersection over union of 61% and 69% for phase-contrast and nuclear images, respectively. This work highlights the potential of integrating cell culture, imaging technologies, and deep learning methodologies in identifying lineage specification, thus contributing to the advancements in regenerative medicine. Collectively, our trained deep learning models can predict the mesoderm cells with high accuracy based on cellular and nuclear morphologies.

[!][Visual_abstract]{/visual_abstract.png)
